https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ACM-13050 improving the topic (#7282)
open-cluster-management/rhacm-docs: troubleshooting/acm_thanos_compactor.adoc

----

[#resolving-thanos-compactor]
== Resolving the problem: Thanos compactor halts

To resolve the problem, increase the storage space of the Thanos compactor PVC. Complete the following steps:

. Increase the storage space for the `data-observability-thanos-compact-0` PVC. See link:../observability/customize_observability.adoc#increase-decrease-pv-pvc[Increasing and decreasing persistent volumes and persistent volume claims] for more information.

. Restart the `observability-thanos-compact` pod by deleting the pod. The new pod is automatically created and started.

+
[source,bash]
----
oc delete pod observability-thanos-compact-0 -n open-cluster-management-observability
----

> . When the Thanos compactor is healthy, the `acm_thanos_compact_todo_compactions` metric is low, and you can attempt to decrease the PVC size.
> //what is "Low" is there a specific value that mmight be considered low? 

Author: @jacobbaungard When you say "consistent cycle" do you mean its a cycle of restarting or the metric being decreased? Can you also confirm that the metric name is accurate? I'm familiar with the metric name, but the todo_compactions part was a little confusing. Is it an example metric name or the actual name? Also, is it important to say "..may be possible." Will there be a moment when the user is unable to decrease the PVC size ? 
```suggestion
. After you restart the `observability-thanos-compact` pod, check the `acm_thanos_compact_todo_compactions` metric. As the Thanos compactor works through the backlog, the metric value decreases. 

. Confirm that the metric changes in a consistent cycle and check the disk usage. Then you can reattempt to decrease the PVC again.

+
*Note:* This might take several weeks. 
```

Reviewer: - Consistent cycle: in a working setup this metric will cycle up and down in a consistent manner here's an example for a small system:

![2024-12-05_15-12-1733409516](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/86f4524d-d90e-4a6f-b2ab-f1b9e1a543cf)

it might look a bit different on other systems, but the metric should go up and down in a cycle which is "consistent" (i.e it should neither be growing contentiously or falling contentiously).

When the compactor is unhealthy: you will see the metric here continuously grow, i.e trending upwards
When the compactor is starting to come back after an unhealthy period, you will start with the metric at "high" number, it will start decreasing (trending downwards), until at some point you reach "a consistent cycle".

Hopefully this makes sense, but pretty hard to put accurately in a document like this perhaps.

- The name of the metric is correct `acm_thanos_compact_todo_compactions` (it's the amount of compactions that the compactor needs to do, but has not yet completed)

- Regarding the decreasing the PVC size again, usually they would be able to decrease it again when the compactor has gone through its backlog. But the customers would need have to look at the disk usage after the recovery and see how it looks and determine if they want to decrease it again, or if they want to keep a higher margin.

You might receive an error message that the compactor is halted. This can occur when there are corrupted blocks or when there is insufficient space on the Thanos compactor persistent volume claim (PVC).

[#symptom-thanos-compactor]
== Symptom: Thanos compactor halts

The Thanos compactor halts because there is no space left on your persistent volume claim (PVC). You receive the following message:

[source,terminal]
----
ts=2024-01-24T15:34:51.948653839Z caller=compact.go:491 level=error msg="critical error detected; halting" err="compaction: group 0@5827190780573537664: compact blocks [ /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE]: 2 errors: populate block: add series: write series data: write /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE.tmp-for-creation/index: no space left on device; write /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE.tmp-for-creation/index: no space left on device"
----

[#resolving-thanos-compactor]
== Resolving the problem: Thanos compactor halts

To resolve the problem, increase the storage space of the Thanos compactor PVC. Complete the following steps:

> . To increase the storage space for the `data-observability-thanos-compact-0` PVC, run the following command:

Author: ```suggestion
. Increase the storage space for the `data-observability-thanos-compact-0` PVC. See link:../observability/customize_observability.adoc#increase-decrease-pv-pvc[Increasing and decreasing persistent volumes and persistent volume claims] for more information.
```

+
----
need command

> ----

Author: ```suggestion
```

. Restart the `observability-thanos-compact` pod by deleting the pod. The new pod is automatically created and started.

+
[source,bash]
----
oc delete pod observability-thanos-compact-0 -n open-cluster-management-observability
----

. When the Thanos compactor is healthy, the `acm_thanos_compact_todo_compactions` metric is low, and you can attempt to decrease the PVC size.

> //what is "Low" is there a specific value that mmight be considered low? 

Author: @jacobbaungard I have a comment here

Reviewer: Right, that's a good question. In most systems where this works well, it is probably 0 at most times, but then it will go up to some higher number for a short amount of time, and back down to 0. On very busy and large deployments, it might look a bit different though, so I am not sure how we best clarify this.

In ideal cases, they should look at the number before starting the resolution, and then keep an eye on it during the resolution so they then have an idea of how it looks.

Maybe something like this could work?

```suggestion
After restarting the pod, keep an eye on the `acm_thanos_compact_todo_compactions` metric. This should start to decrease as the compactor work through the backed up compaction backlog. Note that this may take several weeks. When the `acm_thanos_compact_todo_compactions` metric has decreased and have a consistent cycle, it may be possible to decrease the PVC size again if desired.
```

//what is "Low" is there a specific value that mmight be considered low? 

[#symptom-thanos-compactor-two]
== Symptom: Thanos compactor halts

The Thanos compactor halts because you have corrupted blocks. You might receive the following output where the `01HKZYEZ2DVDQXF1STVEXAMPLE` block is corrupted:

+
[source,terminal]
----
ts=2024-01-24T15:34:51.948653839Z caller=compact.go:491 level=error msg="critical error detected; halting" err="compaction: group 0@15699422364132557315: compact blocks [/var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZQK7TD06J2XWGR5EXAMPLE /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZYEZ2DVDQXF1STVEXAMPLE /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HM05APAHXBQSNC0N5EXAMPLE]: populate block: chunk iter: cannot populate chunk 8 from block 01HKZYEZ2DVDQXF1STVEXAMPLE: segment index 0 out of range"
----

[#resolving-thanos-compactor-two]
== Resolving the problem: Thanos compactor halts

Add the `thanos bucket verify` command to the object storage configuration. Complete the following steps:

> . Verify why the Thanos compactor is halted by using the following command:
> 
> +
> [source,bash]
> ----
> oc logs observability-thanos-compact-0 | grep "halting"
> ----

Author: ```suggestion
```

[#troubleshooting-thanos-compactor]
= Troubleshooting Thanos compactor halts

You might receive a block error message that indicates that the block for Thanos compactor is halted.

[#symptom-thanos-compactor]
== Symptom: Thanos compactor halts

The Thanos compactor halts because there is no space left on your persistent volume claim (PVC). You receive the following message:

[source,terminal]
----
ts=2024-01-24T15:34:51.948653839Z caller=compact.go:491 level=error msg="critical error detected; halting" err="compaction: group 0@5827190780573537664: compact blocks [ /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE]: 2 errors: populate block: add series: write series data: write /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE.tmp-for-creation/index: no space left on device; write /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE.tmp-for-creation/index: no space left on device"
----

[#resolving-thanos-compactor]
== Resolving the problem: Thanos compactor halts

To resolve the problem, increase the storage space of the Thanos compactor PVC. Complete the following steps:

> . Verify why the Thanos compactor is halted by using the following command:
> 
> +
> [source,bash]
> ----
> oc logs observability-thanos-compact-0 | grep "halting"
> ----
> The message that is displayed in the previously mentioned symptom is displayed.

Author: ```suggestion
```

[#troubleshooting-thanos-compactor]
= Troubleshooting Thanos compactor halts

You might receive a block error message that indicates that the block for Thanos compactor is halted.

[#symptom-thanos-compactor]

> == Symptom: Thanos compactor halts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Symptom: Thanos compactor halts due to insufficient space
```

Author: Your suggestion makes sense, I am just following the format that we use throughout our product doc. We typically repeat what is in the main header. For example: https://github.com/stolostron/rhacm-docs/blob/2.12_stage/troubleshooting/trouble_cluster_offline_avail.adoc

Reviewer: I'll leave you to make that decision, but I think that it's a bit harder to see that there can be two completely different reasons for the compacting halting, by reading the headers. I would encourage to try and make better distinctions.

Maybe we could also rewrite the start of the document (i.e line4 in this file) to explain this (I added a suggestion)

The Thanos compactor halts because there is no space left on your persistent volume claim. You receive the following message:

[source,terminal]
----
ts=2024-01-24T15:34:51.948653839Z caller=compact.go:491 level=error msg="critical error detected; halting" err="compaction: group 0@5827190780573537664: compact blocks [ /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE]: 2 errors: populate block: add series: write series data: write /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE.tmp-for-creation/index: no space left on device; write /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE.tmp-for-creation/index: no space left on device"
----

[#resolving-thanos-compactor]

> == Resolving the problem: Thanos compactor halts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Resolving the problem: Thanos compactor halts due to insufficient space
```

Author: Since we moved forward with improving the description, we will keep the headers as is

To resolve the problem, increase the storage space of the Thanos compactor persistent volume claim. Complete the following steps:

> . Verify why the Thanos compactor is halted by using the following command:

Reviewer: Is this necessary, as we already have the logs mentioned above with the error message?

Author: Mhmm i figured the user would need to confirm why it is halted since there are multiple symptoms. But if you think it is unnecessary, I can remove it

Reviewer: You can leave it if you prefer, but the above log line i.e:
```
level=error msg="critical error detected; halting"
```
is the same they would find by executing the command below there.

+
[source,bash]
----
oc logs observability-thanos-compact-0 | grep "halting"
----

> The previous message that is displayed in the symptom is displayed.

Reviewer: confusing sentence

> The previous message that is displayed in the symptom is displayed.

Author: ```suggestion
The message that is displayed in the previously mentioned symptom is displayed.
```

> . To increase the storage space for the `data-observability-thanos-compact-0` pod, run the following command:

Reviewer: pod -> PVC (persistent volume claim)

> . To increase the storage space for the `data-observability-thanos-compact-0` pod, run the following command:

Author: ```suggestion
. To increase the storage space for the `data-observability-thanos-compact-0` PVC, run the following command:
```

+
----

> need command

Reviewer: This is a bit more of a complicated subject, as not all storage backends supports expansion. I would suggest to simply instruct them to increase the pvc size. An experienced admin should be able to figure it out

Author: Is the admin role the only role permitted to increase the PVC size? If not, we should avoid assumptions and provide a general step for the user to complete if there is a general way to increase the PVC.

Reviewer: I suggest we link to the OpenShift docs here: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.17/html/storage/expanding-persistent-volumes

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. We do have a topic in ACM on how to do this: https://github.com/stolostron/rhacm-docs/blob/2.12_stage/observability/customize_observability.adoc#increase-decrease-pv-pvc

is there a reason why we want to point to OCP? I suggest that we point to our doc

Reviewer: Ah did not know we had a ACM had section. Yes let's link to that instead!

----

> . To check the storage for your persistent volum claims of the `data-observability-thanos-store-shard-` pod, run the following command:

Reviewer: Probably not needed given the above.

+
----
need command
----

> . Restart the `observability-thanos-compact` pod by scaling the pod to `0`. The pod is automatically scaled to `1`.

Reviewer: Actually, I think it's easier to simply delete the pod so suggestion would be:

```suggestion
. Restart the `observability-thanos-compact-0` pod by deleting the pod. A new pod should automatically be started.
```

```
oc delete pod observability-thanos-compact-0 -n open-cluster-management-observability
```

Reviewer 2: Avoiding **should** in tech doc if we can, but I agree it is a bit confusing. 

Delete the pod, which automatically restarts the `observability-thanos-compact-0` pod. (Fewer words to say the same thing? @jacobbaungard ?)

Reviewer: That is also ok. Technically the pod is not restarted but deleted and deployed again. Maybe this is more precise:

> Delete the pod `observability-thanos-compact-0` using the following command. A new pod will automatically be deployed.

> . Restart the `observability-thanos-compact` pod by scaling the pod to `0`. The pod is automatically scaled to `1`.
> //is there a command to run for the user to edit this scale?
> 
> . When the Thanos compactor is healthy, the `acm_thanos_compact_todo_compactions` metric is low, and you can attempt to decrease the persistent volume claim size.
> //what is "Low" is there a specific value that mmight be considered low? 

Author: ```suggestion
. Restart the `observability-thanos-compact` pod by deleting the pod. The new pod is automatically created and started.

+
[source,bash]
----
oc delete pod observability-thanos-compact-0 -n open-cluster-management-observability
----

. When the Thanos compactor is healthy, the `acm_thanos_compact_todo_compactions` metric is low, and you can attempt to decrease the persistent volume claim size.
//what is "Low" is there a specific value that mmight be considered low? 
```

[#symptom-thanos-compactor-two]

> == Symptom: Thanos compactor halts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Symptom: Thanos compactor halts due to corrupted block(s)
```

Author: resolving this since we added more details to the intro

The Thanos compactor halts because you have corrupted blocks. You might receive the following output where the `01HKZYEZ2DVDQXF1STVEXAMPLE` block is corrupted:

+
[source,terminal]
----
ts=2024-01-24T15:34:51.948653839Z caller=compact.go:491 level=error msg="critical error detected; halting" err="compaction: group 0@15699422364132557315: compact blocks [/var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZQK7TD06J2XWGR5EXAMPLE /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZYEZ2DVDQXF1STVEXAMPLE /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HM05APAHXBQSNC0N5EXAMPLE]: populate block: chunk iter: cannot populate chunk 8 from block 01HKZYEZ2DVDQXF1STVEXAMPLE: segment index 0 out of range"
----

[#resolving-thanos-compactor-two]

> == Resolving the problem: Thanos compactor halts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Resolving the problem: Thanos compactor halts due to corrupted block(s)
```

Reviewer 2: It's fine to keep the titles here concise in t-shooting but will leave that up to you guys. But this jumped out at me as it is a hard/fast rule on plurals--not to use (s) (translation issue):

https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=grammar-plurals

Add the `thanos bucket verify` command to the object storage configuration. Complete the following steps:

> . Verify why the Thanos compactor is halted by using the following command:

Reviewer: Probably not needed as the error message for this scenario is already listed above?

[#troubleshooting-thanos-compactor]
= Troubleshooting Thanos compactor halts

> You might receive a block error message that indicates that the block for Thanos compactor is halted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might receive an error message that indicates that the compactor has halted. This could be caused either by a bad block, or by the compactor PVC being full.
```

Author: @jacobbaungard i like your suggestion to introduce the symptoms. I made a couple of changes to the suggestion 
```suggestion
You might receive an error message that the compactor is halted. This can occur when there are corrupted blocks or when there is insufficient space on the Thanos compactor persistent volume claim (PVC).
```

[source,terminal]
----
ts=2024-01-24T15:34:51.948653839Z caller=compact.go:491 level=error msg="critical error detected; halting" err="compaction: group 0@5827190780573537664: compact blocks [ /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE]: 2 errors: populate block: add series: write series data: write /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE.tmp-for-creation/index: no space left on device; write /var/thanos/compact/compact/0@15699422364132557315/01HKZGQGJCKQWF3XMA8EXAMPLE.tmp-for-creation/index: no space left on device"
----

[#resolving-thanos-compactor]
== Resolving the problem: Thanos compactor halts

To resolve the problem, increase the storage space of the Thanos compactor PVC. Complete the following steps:

. Verify why the Thanos compactor is halted by using the following command:

+
[source,bash]
----
oc logs observability-thanos-compact-0 | grep "halting"
----
The message that is displayed in the previously mentioned symptom is displayed.

. To increase the storage space for the `data-observability-thanos-compact-0` PVC, run the following command:

+
----
need command
----

> . To check the storage for your persistent volum claims of the `data-observability-thanos-store-shard-` pod, run the following command:
> 
> +
> ----
> need command
> ----

Author: ```suggestion
```
